Refactor and move wal docs (#16387)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/agent/wal-logstore/index.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: WAL LogStore Backend Overview
description: >-
  Consul 1.15 introduced a new experimental storage backend option. Learn how to
  configure and test it out in a safe way.
---

# Experimental WAL LogStore backend overview

This topic provides an overview of the experimental WAL (write-ahead log) LogStore backend. 

!> **Upgrade warning:** The WAL LogStore backend is experimental.

## WAL versus BoltDB

WAL implements a traditional log with rotating, append-only log files. WAL resolves many issues with the existing `LogStore` provided by the BoltDB backend. The BoltDB `LogStore` is a copy-on-write BTree, which is not optimized for append-only workloads. 

The existing BoltDB log store inefficiently stores append-only logs to disk because it was designed as a full key-value database. It is a single file that only ever grows. Deleting the oldest logs, which Consul does regularly when it makes new snapshots of the state, leaves free space in the file. The free space must be tracked so that Consul can reuse it on future writes. By contrast, a simple segmented log can delete the oldest log files from disk. 

> When BoltDB is used as a log backend, a sudden burst of writes at a rate two to three times higher than the normal volume can suddenly cause the log file to grow to several times its steady-state size. After Consul takes the next snapshot and truncates the oldest logs, the resulting file is mostly empty space. To track the free space, Consul must write extra metadata to disk with every write. The metadata is proportional to the amount of free pages, so after a large burst write latencies tend to increase. In some cases, the latencies cause serious performance degradation to the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When BoltDB is used as a log backend, a sudden burst of writes will cause the log file to grow, potentially to several times its usual size. After Consul takes the next snapshot and truncates the oldest logs, the file will contain many unused pages which are recorded in a `freelist`. BoltDB must write this `freelist` to disk with every write. A large `freelist` causes write latencies to increase. In some cases, the latencies cause serious performance degradation to the cluster.
```

> To mitigate risks associated with sudden bursts of log data, Consul prevents too many logs from accumulating in the LogStore. Significantly larger BoltDB files are generally slower to process because the file is structured as a tree. As a result, Consul must iterate through the log for each write. But the larger the file, the more likely it is to have a large freelist or suddenly form one after a burst of writes. For this reason, the many of Consul's default options asssociated with snapshots, truncating logs, and keeping the log history have been aggressively set toward keeping BoltDT small rather than uisng disk IO more efficiently. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To mitigate risks associated with sudden bursts of log data, Consul tries to limit lots of logs from accumulating in the LogStore. Significantly larger BoltDB files are slower to append to because the tree is deeper and freelist larger. For this reason, Consul's default options associated with snapshots, truncating logs, and keeping the log history have been aggressively set toward keeping BoltDB small rather than using disk IO optimally. 
```

> Other reliability issues, such as [raft replication capacity issues](/consul/docs/agent/telemetry#raft-replication-capacity-issues), are also related to balancing the size of the BoltDB log store and length of snapshots. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other reliability issues, such as [raft replication capacity issues](/consul/docs/agent/telemetry#raft-replication-capacity-issues), are much simpler to solve without the performance concerns caused by storing more logs in BoltDB. 
```

Although some users may not experience a significant difference in performance, the WAL backend avoids performance concerns associated with BoltDB. When directly measured, WAL is more performant than BoltDB because it solves a simpler storage problem than BoltDB was designed to solve. For example, WAL can commit a single log entry with one `fsync` instead

> of two and tends to write two to three fewer bytes to the disk to commit the `fsync`. The primary benefit is that retaining more logs does not affect write performance. As a result, strategies for reducing disk IO with slower snapshots or for keeping logs to permit slower followers to catch up with cluster state are all possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When directly measured, WAL is more performant than BoltDB because it solves a simpler storage problem. Despite this, some users may not notice a significant performance improvement from the upgrade with the same configuration and workload. In this case, the benefit of WAL is that retaining more logs does not affect write performance. As a result, strategies for reducing disk IO with slower snapshots or for keeping logs to permit slower followers to catch up with cluster state are all possible, increasing the reliability of the deployment.
```

## WAL quality assurance

The WAL backend has been tested thoroughly during development:

> - Every component in the WAL, such as [metadata management](https://github.com/hashicorp/raft-wal/blob/main/types/meta.go), [log file encoding](https://github.com/hashicorp/raft-wal/blob/main/types/segment.go) to actual [file-system interaction](https://github.com/hashicorp/raft-wal/blob/main/types/vfs.go) were abstracted so unit tests can simulate difficult-to-reproduce disk failures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Every component in the WAL, such as [metadata management](https://github.com/hashicorp/raft-wal/blob/main/types/meta.go), [log file encoding](https://github.com/hashicorp/raft-wal/blob/main/types/segment.go) to actual [file-system interaction](https://github.com/hashicorp/raft-wal/blob/main/types/vfs.go) are abstracted so unit tests can simulate difficult-to-reproduce disk failures.
```

 
- We used the [application-level intelligent crash explorer (ALICE)](https://github.com/hashicorp/raft-wal/blob/main/alice/README.md) to exhaustively simulate thousands of possible crash failure scenarios. WAL correctly recovered from all scenarios.

- We ran hundreds of tests in a performance testing cluster with checksum verification enabled and did not detect data loss or corruption. We will continue testing before making WAL the default backend.

We are aware of how complex and critical disk-persistence is for your data.

> Our goal is that many users at all degrees of scale try WAL in their environments after upgrading to 1.15 or later and report success or failure so that we can confidently replace BoltDB before as the default for new clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We hope that many users at different scales will try WAL in their environments after upgrading to 1.15 or later and report success or failure so that we can confidently replace BoltDB as the default for new clusters in a future release.
```
